NEP 42: Technical decisions for new DTypes (#15507)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0042-new-dtypes.rst

    At this time this NEP is in a preliminary state. Both internal and
    external API may be adapted based on user input or implementation needs.
    The general design principles and choices, while provisional, should
    be expected to not change dramatically.

Detailed Description
--------------------

NEP 41 layed out the creation of a class hierarchy for datatypes using the
new DType classes to provide all necessary implementations.
This NEP defines the specific choice of API necessary to define new DTypes.
Here these are suggested as C-API slots, however, conceptionally these
translate identically to python methods.

Additionally, the NEP proposes to implement the notion of *abstract* DTypes
below.
Further, we detail – in part – how the proposed methods (C-API slots)
enable all necessary use cases.

Each section will begin with a short motivation of the issue or what
problem is addressed. This is followed by a description of the proposed
design choice, and then may list alternatives.

Nomenclature
""""""""""""

As a brief note on nomenclature, it should be noted that ``dtype`` normally
denotes the dtype *instance*, which is the object attached to a numpy array.

> On the other hand the ``DType`` class or type is the subclass of ``np.dtype``.

Author: You are right, I should use only `class` here, "type" has a different meaning (and is closer to `dtype.type`.

   Otherwise rely on the ``type`` attribute, and at least initially may
   inforce deriving the scalar from a NumPy provided scalar.
   This method may be expanded later (see alternatives).
3. ``__discover_descr_from_pyobject__(cls, obj) -> dtype``: A classmethod that
   returns the correct descriptor given the input object.
   *Note that only parametric DTypes have to implement this*, most datatypes
   can simply use a default (singleton) dtype instance which is found only
   based on the ``type(obj)`` of the Python object.

The ``type`` which is already associated with any dtype through the ``dtype.type``
attribute maps the dtype to the Python type.
However, initially we anticipate automatic conversion only for scalars which
subclass from a base scalar object, such as ``np.generic`` (although possibly
a class below ``np.generic`` to avoid arry-scalar behaviour). 
This will be cached globally to create a mapping (dictionary)
``knwon_python_types[type] = DType``.
NumPy currently uses a small hard-coded mapping and conversion of numpy scalars
(inheriting from ``np.generic``) to achieve this, however, this forces a certain
structure on the associated ``type``.

.. note::

>     Python integers do not have a clear/specific NumPy type associated to them
>     right now.  Instead they will need to be be implemented using an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Python integers do not have a clear/specific NumPy type associated with them
    right now.  Instead they will need to be be implemented using an
```
Maybe expand here and explain why (capturing a bit more of the above comment on why Python integers are an interesting example)

    ``AbstractPyInt``, this DType class, can than provide
    ``__discover_descr_from_pyobject__`` and return the actual dtype which
    is e.g. ``np.dtype("int64")``.
    For dispatching/promotion in ufuncs, it will also probably be necessary
    to dynamically create ``AbstractPyInt[value]`` classes (creation can be
    cached), so that they can provide the current functionality provided by
    ``np.result_type(python_integer, array)``.

To allow for a DType to accept specific inputs as known scalars, we will
initially use a method such as ``known_scalar_type`` or ``known_scalar_object``

> which allows discovering a e.g. ``vector`` as a scalar instead of an instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which allows discovering a e.g. ``vector`` as a scalar instead of an instance
```
Instead of "instance" do you mean to say something like "collection of scalars"?

(if ``np.array(vector, dtype=VectorDType)`` is provided).
This will *not* be public API initially, but may be made public at a later
time.

Once the datatype is found (a step that is skipped if the user provides it),
the actual descriptor has to be discovered.
For most datatypes, which are not parametric, this is always a canonical default
instance and ``__discover_descr_from_pyobject__`` does not need to be defined.
For parametric datatypes, however, such as strings, it is necessary to find the

> correct string length and thus inspect the given python object, this is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
correct string length and thus inspect the given Python object, this is
```

also necessary for example for a Categorical datatype.
In this case ``__discover_descr_from_pyobject__`` is called and must return
a dtype instance.
*Implementors should aim to avoid complex logic in this function.*

> After the dtype instance is found, the common dtype with the current previous
> found common dtype instance to find a single dtype that represents all inputs
> and thus support for example mixed integer and floating point input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the dtype instance is found, the common dtype is compared with the current
previously-found common dtype instance to find a single dtype that represents all
inputs and thus supports, for example, mixed integer and floating point input.
```
Unless I've misunderstood, it might be more clear to say "After the dtype instance is found for each element"

Author: Added some pseudo-code, maybe that is a thing I generally need to really, too much text, too little pseudo-code, hmmm...

Reviewer: If there was one over-arching comment I had from the readthrough, it would be this :). Perhaps the most informative part is the picture of the dtype hierarchy - if some of the text could be replaced with an example with pseudo code I think it could really improve digestibility!

Any object which cannot be associated with a dtype will be handled as an
array-like or sequence and discovered recursively.

If one of the objects is an array, or array-like object, its datatype is
used directly.

> In the case where the user provided a DType, it will be force-cast to the
> user given datatype (class). Force-casting is the current behaviour, and this
> may be made more restrictive in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case where the user provided a DType, the object will be force-cast to the
user's given datatype (class). Force-casting is the current behaviour, and this
may be made more restrictive in the future.
```

> In the case that an object is neither a known type, an array-like, or a
> sequence.  The object will be regarded as handled as being of ``object`` dtype.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, in the case that an object is neither a known type, an array-like, nor a
sequence, the object will be handled as being of ``object`` dtype.
```

**Limitations:**

The above issue 3. is currently (sometimes) supported by NumPy so that
the values of an included array are inspected.
Support in those cases may be kept for compatibility, however,
it will not be exposed to user datatypes.
This means that if e.g. an array with a parametric string dtype is coerced above
(or cast) to an array of a fixed length string dtype (with unknown length),
this will result in an error.
Such a conversion will require passing the correct DType (fixed length of the
string) or providing a utility function to the user.

> The use of a global type map means that an error or warning has to be given
> if two DTypes wish to map to the same python type, in most cases DTypes user
> DTypes should only be implemented for types defined within the same library to
> avoid the potential for conflicts and .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The use of a global type map means that an error or warning has to be given
if two DTypes wish to map to the same Python type. In most cases user
DTypes should only be implemented for types defined within the same library to
avoid the potential for conflicts.
```
Removed the "and" at the end but it seems there may have been another thought there you wished to include

> It is the DType implementors responsibility to be careful about this and use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will be the DType implementor's responsibility to be careful about this and use
```

the flag to disable registration when in doubt.

**Alternatives:**

The above proposes to add a global mapping, however, initially limiting it
to types deriving from a NumPy subclass (and a fixed set of Python types).
This could be relaxed in the future.
Alternatively, we could rely on the scalar belonging to the user dtype to
implement ``scalar.dtype`` or similar.
Initially, at the moment the exact implementation shall be *undefined*.

> Scalars will have to derive from a NumPy scalar, and provide at least a
> ``.dtype`` attribute. Although, this may not be used within NumPy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scalars will have to derive from a NumPy scalar and provide at least a
``.dtype`` attribute, though, this may not be used within NumPy.
```

Any such scalar shall be expected to have a corresponding DType.

An initial alternative suggestion was to use a two-pass approach instead.
The first pass would only find the correct DType class, and the second pass
would then find correct dtype instance (the second pass is often not necessary).
The advantage of this is that the DType class information is vital for universal
functions to decide which loop to execute.

> The first pass would provide the full information necessary for value based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first pass would provide the full information necessary for value-based
```

casting currently implemented for scalars, giving even the possibility of
expanding it to e.g. list inputs ``np.add(np.array([8], dtype="uint8"), [4])``
giving a ``uint8`` result.
This is mainly related to the question to how the common dtype is found above.
It seems unlikely that this is useful, and similar to a global, could be
added later if deemed necessary.

> **Further Issues or Discussion:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Further Issues and Discussion:**
```

> While it is possible to create e.g. a DTypes such as Categorical, array,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is possible to create e.g. a DType such as Categorical, array,
```

or vector which can only be used if `dtype=DType` is provided, if this
is necessary these will not roundtrip correctly when converted back
and forth::

    np.array(np.array(1, dtype=Categorical)[()])

requires to pass the original ``dtype=Categorical`` or returns an array
with dtype ``object``.
While a general limitation, the roundtripping shall always be possible if
``dtype=old_dtype`` is provided.

**Example:**

The current datetime DType requires a ``__discover_descr_from_pyobject__``
which returns the correct unit for string inputs.  This allows it to support
the current::

    np.array(["2020-01-02", "2020-01-02 11:24"], dtype="M8")

> By inspecting the date strings. Together with the below common dtype
> operation this allows it to automatically find that the datetime64 unit
> should be "minutes".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By inspecting the date strings. Together with the below common dtype
operation, this allows it to automatically find that the datetime64 unit
should be "minutes".
```

Common DType Operations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Numpy currently provides functionality of ``np.result_type`` and
> ``np.promote_types`` (while more common, ``np.result_type`` has some more
> complex logic due to implementing value based promotion [value_based]_).
> (Note that the name ``np.common_type`` is associated with the scalars and not
> directly with dtypes and is of limited usefulness)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Numpy currently provides functions like ``np.result_type`` and
``np.promote_types`` for determining common types [#ct1]_ [#ct2]_

.. [#ct1] While ``np.promote_types` is more common, ``np.result_type`` has some more complex logic due to implementing value-based promotion [value_based]_.
.. [#ct2] Note that the name ``np.common_type`` is associated with the scalars and not directly with dtypes and is of limited usefulness)
```
Since you have two parenthetical statements here, you could try turning them into footnotes instead (I think the syntax I suggested is at least close to how you can do that in rST)

Author: Just deleted half of it :).

To distinguish between the promotion occuring during universal function application,
here common type operation is used instead of promotion.

**Motivation:**

> This common type operations is vital for the above array coercion when different
> input types are mixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common type operations are vital for array coercion when different
input types are mixed.
```

> It also provides the logic currently used to decide the output dtype of
> ``np.concatenate()`` and on its own is a useful operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They also provide the logic currently used to decide the output dtype of
``np.concatenate()`` and on their own are quite useful.
```

> Furthermore, it may be used to find the correct dtype to use for functions with
> different inputs (including universal functions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, common type operations may be used to find the correct dtype
to use for functions with different inputs (including universal functions).
```

This includes an interesting distinction:

1. Universal functions use the DType classes for dispatching, they thus
   require the common DType class (as a first step).
   While this can help with finding the correct loop to execute, the loop
   may not need the actual common dtype instance.
   (Hypothetical example:
   ``float_arr + string_arr -> string``, but the output string length is
   not the same as ``np.concatenate(float_arr, string_arr)).dtype``.)

> 2. Array coercion, and concatenate require the common dtype *instance*.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Array coercion and concatenation require the common dtype *instance*.   
```

**Implementation:**

> The implementation of the common dtype (instance) has some overlap with
> casting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation of the common dtype (instance) determination 
has some overlap with casting.
```

1. ``__common_dtype__(cls, other : DTypeMeta) -> DTypeMeta`` answers what the common
   DType class is. It may return ``NotImplemented`` to defer to ``other``.
   (For abstract DTypes, subclasses get precedence, concrete types are always
   leaves, so always get preference or are tried from left to right). 
2. ``__common_instance__(self, other : cls) -> cls`` is used when two instances
   of the same DType are given. For builtin dtypes (that are not parametric), this
   currently always returns ``self`` (but ensures native byte order).
   This is to preserve metadata. We can thus provide a default implementation
   for non-parametric user dtypes.

These two cases do *not* cover the case where two different dtype instances
need to be promoted. For example `">float64"` and `"S8"`.
The solution is partially "outsourced" to the casting machinery by
splitting the operation up into three steps:

1. ``__common_dtype__(type(>float64), type(S8))`` returns `String`.
2. The casting machinery provides the information that `">float64"` casts
   to `"S32"` (see below for how casting will be defined).
3. ``__common_instance__("S8", "S32")`` returns the final `"S32"`. 

> The main reason for this is to avoid identical functionality in different

Reviewer: in different <something missing>

which may lead to inconsistent implementations.
The design (together with casting) naturally separates the concerns of
different Datatypes.

> Even if tempted, the above Float64 cannot assume it knows how to step 3 correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if tempted, the above Float64 cannot assume it knows how to resolve step 3 correctly.
```

**Note:**

The common type operation cannot be simplified to using only safe casting
logic.

> As a fall-back testing whether one of the inputs can be safely cast to the
> other could be used when no specific ``__common_dtype__`` is implemented.
> However, this does not allow for the case of::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a fallback, testing whether one of the inputs can be safely cast to the
other could be used when no specific ``__common_dtype__`` is implemented.
However, this does not allow for the case of::
```

    np.promote_types("int64", "float32") -> np.dtype("float64")

However, *if one DType can be safely cast to the other this should also be
the common DType*. The operation is mainly required because the common dtype
will often be neither of the inputs.

If a "safe casting" fallback is desired (the default implementation),
this has to be implemented by the overriding implementation.

**Alternatives:**

> The use of casting for common dtype (instance) neatly separates the concerns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The use of casting for common dtype (instance) determination neatly separates the concerns
```

and allows for a minimal set of duplicate functionality being implemented.

> In cases of mixed DType (classes), it also adds an additional indirection

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what is meant by "indirection" here

into finding the common dtype.
The common dtype (of two instances) could thus be implemented explicitly to avoid
this indirection, potentially only as a fast-path.
The above suggestion assumes that this is, however, not a speed relevant path,

> since in most cases, e.g. in array coercion, only a single python type (and thus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
since in most cases, e.g. in array coercion, only a single Python type (and thus
```

the behaviour of an existing program. For example, a new ``int24`` would be
the first valid common type for ``int16`` and ``uint16``, demoting the currently
defined behaviour of ``int32``.
This API extension could be allowed in the future, while adding it may be
more involved, the current proposal for defining casts is fully opaque in
this regard and thus extensible.

**Example:**

``object`` always chooses ``object`` as the common DType.  For ``datetime64``
type promotion is defined with no other datatype, but if someone were to
implement a new higher precision datetime, then::

    HighPrecisionDatetime.__common_dtype__(np.dtype[np.datetime64])

would return ``HighPrecisionDatetime``, and the below casting may need to
decide how to handle the datetime unit.

Casting
^^^^^^^

Maybe the most complex and interesting operation which is provided
by DTypes is the ability to cast from one dtype to another.
The casting operation is much like a typical function (universal function) on
arrays converting one input to a new output.
There mainly two distinctions:

1. Casting always requires an explicit output datatype to be given.

> 2. The NumPy iterator API requires access to lower level functions than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The NumPy iterator API requires access to lower-level functions than
```

>    is necessary for current universal functions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   is currently necessary for universal functions. 
```

Casting from one dtype to another can be complex, and generally a casting
function may not implement all details of each input datatype (such as
non-native byte order or unaligned access).
Thus casting naturally is performed in up to three steps:

1. The input datatype is normalized and prepared for the actual cast.
2. The cast is performed.
3. The cast result, which is in a normalized form, is cast to the requested
   form (non-native byte order).

although often only step 2. is required.

Further, NumPy provides different casting kinds or safety specifiers:

* "safe"
* "same_kind"
* "unsafe"

and in some cases a cast may even be represented as a simple view.

**Motivation:**

> Similar to the common dtype/DType operation above, we again have to use cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the common dtype/DType operation above, we again have two use cases:
```

implementation as necessary, i.e. to avoid unnecessary methods on the
DTypes.
Furthermore, it is desirable that casting is implemented similar to universal
functions.

Analogous to the above, the following also need to be defined:

1. ``np.can_cast(dtype, DType, "safe")`` (instance to class)
2. ``np.can_cast(dtype, other_dtype, "safe")`` (casting an instance to another instance)

overloading the meaning of ``dtype`` to mean either class or instance
(on the Python level).
The question of ``np.can_cast(DType, OtherDType, "safe")`` is also possibly
and may be used internally.
However, it is initially not necessary to expose to Python.

**Implementation:**

During DType creation, DTypes will have the ability to pass a list of
``CastingImpl`` objects, which can define casting to and from the DType.
One of these ``CastingImpl`` objects is special because it should define
the cast within the same DType (from one instance to another).
A DType which does not define this, must have only a single implementation
and not be parametric.

DTypes such as a Unit datatype, wrapping an existing Numerical datatype *must*
be able to access these ``CastingImpl``.

> The will be able to wrap and modify them as necessary. This means that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They will be able to wrap and modify them as necessary. This means that
```

These return a ``CastingImpl`` defined in some more detail in the next section.
It also answers the last question: ``np.can_cast(DType, OtherDType, "safe")``
since ``CastingImpl`` defines a ``CastingImpl.cast_kind = "safe"``.

Each ``CastingImpl`` has a specific DType signature:
``CastingImpl[InputDtype, RequestedDtype]``.
Additionally, it will have one more method::

    adjust_descriptors(self, Tuple[DType] : input) -> casting, Tuple[DType]

(this method is common with the ufunc machineray, see NEP 43).
Here, valid values for ``input`` are:

* ``(input_dtype, None)``
* ``(input_dtype, requested_dtype)``

Where input and requested dtypes must be instances of ``InputDType`` and ``RequestedDtype``.
In the first case, when ``None`` is given, no dtype instance was requested.
The returned values will be a new tuple of two datatypes, filling in ``None``
if necessary.
Note that the output *can* differ from the input.
At the beginning casting was described as a, possibly, three step process.
The ``CastingImpl`` only defines the single step 2.
If the returned datatypes differ from the provided ones, this means that additional
casting steps are required for either input or output.

> The casting returned by ``adjust_descriptors`` and set on the CastingImpl as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The casting returned by ``adjust_descriptors`` and set on the ``CastingImpl`` as
```

on the DTypes. This, however, will not allow the close similarity between casting
and universal functions. On the up side, it reduces the necessary indirection
as noted below.

An initial proposal defined two methods ``__can_cast_to__(self, other)``
to dynamically return ``CastingImpl``.
The advantage of this addition is that it removes the requirement to know all
possible casts at DType creation time (of one of the involved DTypes).
Such API could be added at a later time. It should be noted, however,
that it would be mainly useful for inheritance like logic, which can be
problematic. As an example two different ``Float64WithUnit`` implementations
both could infer that they can unsafely cast between one another when in fact
some conbinations should cast safely or preserve the Unit (both of which the
"base" ``Float64`` would discard).
In the proposed implementation this is not possible, since the two implementations
are not aware of each other.

**Notes:**

The proposed ``CastingImpl`` this designed to be compatible with the
``UFuncImpl`` proposed in NEP 42.
While initially it will be a distinct object, the aim is that ``CastingImpl``

> can be a subclass of ``UFuncImpl`` (at least conceptionally).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be a subclass of ``UFuncImpl`` (at least conceptually).
```

      /* NULL terminated CastingImpl; is copied and references are stolen */
      CastingImpl *castingimpls[];
      PyType_Slot *slots;
      PyTypeObject *baseclass;  /* Baseclass or NULL */
    } PyArrayDTypeMeta_Spec;

    PyObject* PyArray_InitDTypeMetaFromSpec(PyArrayDTypeMeta_Spec *dtype_spec);

all of this information will be copied during instantiation.

**TODO:** The DType author should be able to at define new methods for
their DType, up to defining a full type object and in the future possibly even
extending the ``PyArrayDTypeMeta_Type`` struct.
We have to decide on how (and what) to make available to the user initially.
A proposed initial solution may be to simply allow inheriting from an existing
class.
Further this prevents overriding some slots, such as `==` which may not be
desirable.

The proposed method slots are (prepended with ``NPY_dt_``), these are
detailed above and given here for summary:

* ``is_canonical(self) -> {0, 1}``
* ``ensure_canonical(self) -> dtype``
* ``default_descr(self) -> dtype`` (return must be native and should normally be a singleton)
* ``get_sort_function(self, NPY_SORTKIND sort_kind) -> {out_sortfunction, NotImplemented, NULL}``.

>   If the sortkind is not understand it may be allowed to return ``NotImplemented``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the sortkind is not understood it may be allowed to return ``NotImplemented``.
```

* ``discover_descr_from_pyobject(cls, PyObject) -> dtype or NULL``
* ``common_dtype(cls, other) -> DType, NotImplemented, or NULL``
* ``common_instance(self, other) -> dtype or NULL``

If not set, most slots are filled with slots which either error or defer automatically.
Non-parametric dtypes do not have to implement:

* ``discover_descr_from_pyobject`` (uses ``default_descr`` instead)
* ``common_instance`` (uses ``default_descr`` instead)
* ``ensure_canonical`` (uses ``default_descr`` instead)

Which will be correct for most dtypes *which do not store metadata*.

Other slots may be replaced by convenience versions, e.g. sorting methods
can be defined by providing:

* ``compare(self, char *item_ptr1, char *item_ptr2, int *res) -> {-1, 0}``
  *TODO: We would like an error return, is this reasonable? (similar to old
  python compare)*

which uses generic sorting functionality.

**Limitations:**

Using the above ``PyArrayDTypeMeta_Spec`` struct, the structure itself can
only be extended clumsily (e.g. by adding a version tag to the ``slots``
to indicate a new, longer version of the struct).
We could also provide the struct using a function, which however will require

> memory management but would allow ABI compatible extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
memory management but would allow ABI-compatible extension
```

(the struct is freed again when the DType is created).

CastingImpl
"""""""""""

The external API for ``CastingImpl`` will be limited initially to defining:

* ``cast_kind`` attribute, which can be one of the supported casting kinds.
  This is the safest cast possible. For example casting between two NumPy
  strings is of course "safe" in general, but may be "same kind" in a specific
  instance if the second string is shorter. If neither type is parametric this
  ``adjust_descriptors`` must use it. 
* ``adjust_descriptors(dtypes_in[2], dtypes_out[2], casting) -> int {0, -1}``
* ``strided_loop(char **args, npy_intp *dimensions, npy_intp *strides, dtypes[2]) -> int {0, nonzero}`` (must currently succeed)

This is identical to the proposed API for ufuncs. By default the two dtypes
are passed in as the last argument. On error return (if no error is set) a
generic error will be given.

> More optimized loops are in use internally, and made available to users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More optimized loops are in use internally, and will be made available to users
```

in the future (see notes)
The iterator API currently does not currently support casting errors, this is

> a bug that needs to be fixed. While it is not fixed the loop should always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a bug that needs to be fixed. Until it is fixed the loop should always
```

allow future merging.

**TODO:** It may be possible to make this more close to the ufuncs or even
use a single FromSpec.  This API shall only be finalized after/when NEP 43
is finalized.

**Notes:**

We may initially allow users to define only a single loop.
However, internally NumPy optimizes far more, and this should be made
public incrementally, by either allowing to provide multiple versions, such
as:

* contiguous inner loop
* strided inner loop
* scalar inner loop

or more likely through an additional ``get_inner_loop`` function which has
additional information, such as the fixed strides (similar to our internal API).

The above example does not yet include the definition of setup/teardown
functionality, which may overlap with ``get_inner_loop``.
Since these are similar to the UFunc machinery, this should be defined in
detail in NEP 43 and then incorporated identically into casting.

Also the ``needs_api`` decision may actually be moved into a setup function,
and removed or mainly provided as a convenience flag.

The slots/methods used will be prefixed ``NPY_uf_`` for similarity to the ufunc
machinery.

Alternatives
""""""""""""

> Aside from name changes, and possible signature tweaks, there seems few
> alternatives to the above structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from name changes, and possible signature tweaks, there seem to
be few alternatives to the above structure.
```

Keeping the creation process close the Python limited API has some advantage.
Convenience functions could still be provided to allow creation with less
code.
The central point in the above design is that the enumerated slots design
is extensible and can be changed without breaking binary compatibility.
A downside is the possible need to pass in e.g. integer flags using a void
pointer inside this structure.

A downside of this is that compilers cannot warn about function

> pointer incompatibilities, there is currently no proposed solution to this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pointer incompatibilities. There is currently no proposed solution to this.
```

Issues
^^^^^^

Any possible design decision will have issues, two of which should be mentioned
here.
The above split into Python objects has the disadvantage that reference cycles
naturally occur, unless ``CastingImpl`` is bound every time it is returned.
Although normally Numpy DTypes are not expected to have a limited lifetime,
this may require some thought.

A second downside is that by splitting up the code into more natural and
logical parts, some exceptions will be less specific.
This should be alleviated almost entirely by exception chaining, although it
is likely that the quality of some error messages will be impacted at least
temporarily.

Implementation
--------------

Internally a few implementation details have to be decided. These will be
fully opaque to the user and can be changed at a later time.

This includes:

* How ``CastingImpl`` lookup, and thus the decision whether a cast is possible,
  is defined. (This is speed relevant, although mainly during a transition

>   phase where UFuncs where NEP YY is not yet implemented).

Reviewer: A little redundancy in this line

  Thus, it is not very relevant to the NEP. It is only necessary to ensure fast
  lookup during the transition phase for the current builtin Numerical types.

Discussion
----------

There is a large space of possible implementations with many discussions
in various places, as well as initial thoughts and design documents.
These are listed in the discussion of NEP 40 and not repeated here for

> brievaty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
brevity.
```

the general C-API for defining new Datatypes.
Note that while the slots are defined as special Python methods here, this is
for convenience to the reader and *not* meant to imply the identical exposure
as a Python API.
This will need to be proposed in a separate, later, NEP.

Some of the methods may be similar or even reuse existing Python slots.
User-defined DType classes are discouraged from defining or using Python's
special slots without feedback, in order to allow defining them later.
For example ``dtype1 & dtype2`` (or maybe ``|``) could be a shorthand for
``np.common_dtype``, and comparisons should be defined mainly through casting
logic.

Additional Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the more detailed methods below, the following general
information is currently provided and will be defined on the class:

* ``cls.parametric`` (see also `NEP 40 <NEP40>`_):

  * This flag is mainly to simplify DType and casting creation and
    allow for performance tweaks.
  * DTypes which are not parametric must define a canonical dtype instance
    which should be a singleton.
  * Parametric dtypes require some additional methods (below).

>   * One can alternatively create a ``ParametricDType`` class for this purpose,

Author: Will look into the image (and other comments).

I think am OK with going there, the question is mainly how to expose it in the C-API I think, for the Python API, I am definitely +1, will add both as options for now. Internally, I think I can assume the flag exists, since I can always set it as part of the metaclass instantiation (similar to python using a flag to implement super-fast subclass checks for some basic types).

    although for the C-side API a flag seems simpler.

* ``self.canonical`` method (Alternative: new instance attribute)

  * Instead of byteorder, we may want an ``canonical`` flag (reusing the
    ISNBO flag – "is native byte order" seems possible here).
    This flag signals that the data are stored in the default/canonical way.
    In practice this is always an NBO check, but generalization should be possible.
    A potential use case is a complex-conjugated instance of Complex which
    stores ``real - imag`` instead of ``real + imag`` and is thus not
    the canonical storage.

* ``ensure_canonical(self) -> dtype`` return a new dtype (or ``self``).
   The returned dtype must have the ``canonical`` flag set.

* ``DType.type`` is the associated scalar type.  ``dtype.type`` will be a
  class attribute and the current ``dtype.type`` field considered
  deprecated. This may be relaxed if a usecase arises.

Additionally, existing methods (and C-side fields) will be provided, although
fields such as the "kind" and and "char" may be set to invalid values on

> the C-side, and access may error on the Python side.

Author: Hmm, very good point. I thought it might error for new dtypes. But you are right, it would be better if it does not.  This means that `"kind"` must return *something* though.

There are two options:

1. The dtype author has to provide a `kind`
2. We simply return the same kind (e.g. None) when it is not defined.

The only problem I see is code which for some reason would do `dtype1.kind == dtype2.kind`, I suppose this is rare, since most will be `dtype.kind == "i"`, etc.  Also on the C-side we are limited to a single struct.  For now I thought we can simply return `\0` for all user dtypes.

In the end, this would mean user dtypes must use `isinstance` checks or similar instead in the long run.

@jorisvandenbossche do you have an opinion on this or does pandas have prior art?

> the C-side, and access may error on the Python side.

Reviewer 2: It's maybe not a problem that it is undefined (or None) for user dtypes, I was mainly thinking about the built-in types like int64. 
In pandas we eg use `kind` as a fast check for certain dtypes (like `dtype.kind in ("u", "i")` for integer dtypes). 

For our own dtypes, we define a "kind" on the dtype object (for compatibility I assume), but it is not always clear what this should be or how it is useful. I think we mostly took the the numpy one if there is a direct equivalent (eg our masked integer dtype also gives kind="i"/"u"), or otherwise just "O" for things like categorical and interval dtypes.

> the C-side, and access may error on the Python side.

Reviewer 3: Maybe the default should be to return the `dtype` itself (or perhaps its name!?), so it is guaranteed to compare equal only to itself?

Another example of methods that should be moved to the DType class are the
various sorting functions, which shall be implemented by defining a method:

> * ``dtype_get_sort_function(self, sortkind="stable") -> sortfunction``

Author: Yes, I should note `compare`, which also exists.

We may want to also just delay this, and instead see if we cannot go the gufunc route to eventually allow fast-path sorting for user-dtypes.  The only problem I see with that is that we need a set of internal gufuncs for all different sort-kinds.

> * ``dtype_get_sort_function(self, sortkind="stable") -> sortfunction``

Reviewer 3: True, it would definitely need different `gufunc`, but that code already exists, so should be OK. I think @eric-wieser's adaptations of `gufunc` for `np.linalg` are a nice model to follow.

associated with it. Instead the ``type`` may just be ``object``, its values are
are arbitrary objects.  Unlike well-defined scalars, this ``type`` could
not be used for the dtype discovery necessary for coercion
(compare section `DType Discovery during Array Coercion`_).

Coercion to and from Python Objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Motivation:**

When storing a single value in an array or taking it out of the array
a conversion must be made from the low-level representation to the Python
object describing the scalar value.

**Description:**

Coercing to and from Python scalars requires two to three methods:

1. ``__dtype_setitem__(self, item_pointer, value)``
2. ``__dtype_getitem__(self, item_pointer, base_obj) -> object``
   The ``base_obj`` should be ignored normally, it is provided *only* for
   memory management purposes, pointing to an object owning the data.
   It exists only to allow support of structured datatypes with subarrays
   within NumPy, which (currently) return views into the array.
   The function returns an equivalent Python scalar (i.e. typically a NumPy
   scalar).

> 3. ``__dtype_get_pyitem__(self, item_pointer, base_obj) -> object``

Author: Well, This is tricky and I may have to expand a bit. In my current branch, I already include casting (for scalars).  This means that `DType.__set_item__()` only needs to correctly be implemented for python types known to the DType (in particular, it must work for its own python scalar-type if that exists).
If the `DType` does not know what to do with the `value`, we will try to find the matching DType and then use casting.

This is currently not really done in NumPy (`float128` has a partial hack), and most types actually can handle everything in theory (since `value.__float__()` is correct for `float16`, `float32` and `float64`).

My current implementation is this:
```
if DType.type is type(value) and  DType.is_known_scalartype(value):
    # By default, should handle all basic python types
    return dtype.__dtype_setitem__(pointer, value)

cast_from_DType = disover_DType_from_pytype(type(value))
if cast_from_DType is None:
     # Not a scalar known to NumPy, so give original setitem a chance.
     return return dtype.__dtype_setitem__(pointer, value)

# We found a DType associated to the scalar type
cast_dtype = DType.discover_descriptor_from_pyobj(value)
tmp_buffer = buffer(size=descr.itemsize)
cast_dtype. __dtype_setitem__(buffer, value)
# cast tmp_buffer and write into pointer.
return
```
will add similar pseudo-code here as well.

> 3. ``__dtype_get_pyitem__(self, item_pointer, base_obj) -> object``

Reviewer 3: Probably good to expand as I'm not quite sure where the pseudo-code lives. Also not quite sure about the first `if` statement (why is being the right type not enough and does `value` needs to be checked) or the disappearance of pointer in the last clause. 

But I'll add that I've never even really looked properly at the current implementation, so if my requests for more clarification are becoming too much, do just ignore them!

    def common_dtype(DType1, DType2):
        common_dtype = type(dtype1).__common_dtype__(type(dtype2))
        if common_dtype is NotImplemented:
            common_dtype = type(dtype2).__common_dtype__(type(dtype1))
            if common_dtype is NotImplemented:
                raise TypeError("no common dtype")
        return common_dtype

    def promote_types(dtype1, dtyp2):
        common = common_dtype(type(dtype1), type(dtype2))

        if type(dtype1) is not common:
            # Find what dtype1 is cast to when cast to the common DType
            # by using the CastingImpl as described below:
            castingimpl = get_castingimpl(type(dtype1), common)
            safety, (_, dtype1) = castingimpl.adjust_descriptors((dtype1, None))
            assert safety == "safe"  # promotion should normally be a safe cast

        if type(dtype2) is not common:
            # Same as above branch for dtype1.

        if dtype1 is not dtype2:
            return common.__common_instance__(dtype1, dtype2)

Some of these steps may be optimized for non-parametric DTypes.

**Note:**

The common type operation cannot be simplified to using only safe casting

> logic.

Author: I tried to rephrase this a bit. The Casting section (as opposed to just common dtype) below, I rewrote larger chunks... (and added an image, to come soon).

The casting returned by ``adjust_descriptors`` and set on the ``CastingImpl`` as
a maximum version should consist of safest cast which is allowed:

* ``NPY_SAFE_CASTING``, ``NPY_SAME_KIND_CASTING``, ``NPY_UNSAFE_CASTING``
* a ``NPY_CAST_IS_VIEW`` *flag*

Where the current ``NPY_EQUIV_CASTING`` should be signaled by
``NPY_SAFE_CASTING | NPY_CAST_IS_VIEW``. By returning this, the error
message is given in a place with more information available, and new modes
could be added in principle.
(The general casting does not need to define ``CAST_IS_VIEW``.)

**Casting between instances of the same DType:**

One of the casting implementations added should define ``CastingImpl[DType, DType]``,
this implementation must be capable of handling any remaining steps, such
as byteswapping.
If not implemented, the datatype may only have a singleton implementation.

**Actual casting:**

To provide the actual casting functionality, an additional method:

* ``get_transferfunction(...)``

is necessary to provide a low-level C-implementation.
However, this method shall *not* be part of the public API, instead
users will initially be limited in what casting functions they can provide

> (e.g. only contiguous loops of multiple items as is used right now).

Author: I am currently refusing to do such complex casts. A DType can only define a cast from one of itself to another.

I had currently no intention of "finding a path".  Such direct cast would be either undefined, _or_ one of the DTypes would have to hard-code such a path/fallback.  I would hope that there would be no issue with adding such things later, although I also somewhat hope that it is simply not actually necessary here and would just be over-engineering :).

> (e.g. only contiguous loops of multiple items as is used right now).

Reviewer 3: @seberg - definitely fair to keep it simple, and I think as long as there is a general function that does the "search" for a transfer function, it would be extensible anyway.

Still, it may be good to discuss explicitly the straw-man `int24` type that has come up before. If a user were to define it, would there need to be definitions of conversion functions to all numpy `int` and `uint` (and float) types, or just a generic conversion from `int` (and `float`?) and perhaps fast ones from `np.int16` and `np.int8` or so (ie., would it be possible to have conversion if the other `dtype` provided a way to convert to a type in common, say `int` or `float`).

Note that I don't think this actually affects anything for the new `dtype` class, and perhaps it is discussed already in one of the other NEPs... If so, all that's needed here might be a cross-reference.

> (e.g. only contiguous loops of multiple items as is used right now).

Author: Yes, as of my thoughts now `int24` would have to define all of those casts manually.  In theory it could be simple to extend this I guess.
One option could be to allow a CastingImpl (and generally cast) be a multi-step (instead of at most 3 step) process.  You would still have to define a `CastingImpl[int8, int24]`, but internally, it could just point to the same loop as `CastingImpl[int32, int24]`, and its `adjust_descriptor` function would return `int32, int24` instead of `int8,int24`. At which point NumPy would know that it has to do more steps to do the cast.

That might be a bit of a middle ground.  You still need to *define* all the casts, but it can be sufficient to write fewer transfer functions.  If buggy, such a chain of casts may never settle I suppose, but in practice I guess it should be OK and likely not even much more difficult.

I think it is important to note that this is at least a very much possible extension of the API.  The alternative is to have the API getting a full cast-function to actually try to find the graph by itself.  But at that point even the question of whether or not a cast is safe would be a multi-step process.

> (e.g. only contiguous loops of multiple items as is used right now).

Reviewer 3: OK, thanks. I indeed think it is extensible, so for now maybe all that is needed is to be explicit about what it is now and that it is possible to extend if the need arises. Clearly, it will never *hurt* to define all the transformations explicitly!

the ``dtype.num`` and ``dtype.char``.
Please see the `dtype hierarchy figure <hierarchy_figure>`_ for an
illustration of this distinction.

There are currently classes in NumPy for numeric types e.g. 
``np.float64``; however,
these are not DTypes but the corresponding scalar classes
(see also NEP 40 and 41 for discussion on why these are largely unrelated to
the proposed changes).

Proposed access to DType class
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

**Motivation:**

Currently we often use e.g. ``np.dtype(np.int64)`` to create the dtype
instance corresponding to a given scalar type. Adding the DType class
means that a way to access that class may be required.

**Description:**

To avoid duplication, but also expose the classes conveniently to users
we propose the addition of::

    np.dtype[np.int64]

as a class getter. This can work both for user and NumPy DTypes,
although, in many cases a library may choose to provide a more direct
way to access the specific DType class.
This method may initially be limited to concrete DTypes. 
The main reason for this choice is to provide a single
clear and future-proof way to find the DType class given the

> Python (scalar) class.

Reviewer 4: Are we sure we want to introduce a second way to spell this, given that `np.dtype(cls)` is already a well-established mechanism to convert a scalar type to a dtype?

Author: No, I am not sure about this, it is more of a thought and I could reduce or even remove this for now.

There is a generalization whether we should after all consider to create `parametric` instances (similar to our "S0").
I had decided against this, but passing around parametric instances has its advantages (since for some functions the input can be a `dtype` instance _or_ a `DType` class).
But on the other hand, means that the neat split between: instances can always be attached arrays, classes cannot. Is gone.

Note that there are some subtleties around this. E.g. `np.dtype(np.float64)` enforces that you do get native byte-order (the default instances), while `np.dtype[np.float64]` (or however you spell it if you want to) will *not* enforce that if the input is already a `>float64`.

So the question is whether `np.dtype(Unit)` should be allowed and return something which cannot be attached to an array...

I guess the main issue is about `issubdtype` checks in the long run.  E.g. how to check whether a dtype is `inexact`, since `isinstance(dtype, np.dtype[np.inexact])` is not very cute (of course the `dtype.type` way/subdtype stays valid.

This should not be a common operation, so providing this helper reduces the
pressure of adding the new DType classes into the namespace.

Hierarchy of DTypes and Abstract DTypes
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

**Motivation:**
The creation of a DType classes has already been decided in NEP 41.
Here we discuss the notion of **abstract** DTypes.
There are multiple reasons for this:

1. It allows the definition of a class hierarchy, in principle allowing checks like
   ``isinstance(np.dtype("float64"), np.inexact)``.
   **This hierarchy may be a prerequisite to implementing dispatching
   for universal functions (NEP 43)**
2. Abstract DTypes can enable code such as
   ``arr.astype(Complex)`` to express the desire to cast to a
   complex data type of any precision.
3. It anticipates the creation of families of DTypes by users.
   For example allowing the creation of an abstract ``Unit`` class with a concrete
   ``Float64Unit``. In which case ``Unit(np.float64, "m")`` could be

>    identical to ``Float64Unit("m")``.

Author: Well, I think its open for the implementer, and I agree that `Unit(np.float64, "m")` should give a concrete `dtype` instance (I assume this is what you mean).  I personally think the existence of a `Float64Unit` as a DType class may make sense, because it seems to me it would make dispatching simpler (and a single step).  However, I agree that this is not strictly necessary. I will try to shorten the example a bit.

A very concrete example is the current Pandas ``Categorical`` DType
which may benefit from abstraction to allow the differentiation of
a categorical of integer values and one of general object values.
The reason for this is that we may want to reject
``common_dtype(CategoricalInt64, String)`` while
``common_dtype(CategoricalObject, String)`` is valid and the result
will have the ``object`` DType.

> While the current ``Categorical`` combines both and must still be represented.

Author: Thanks, I had just fixed the last sentence earlier, used your wording its much nicer.

* ``cls.parametric`` (see also `NEP 40 <NEP40>`_):

  * Parametric will be a flag in the (private) C-API. However, the
    Python API will instead use a ``ParametricDType`` class from
    which to inherit.  (This is similar to Python's type flags, which include
    flags for some basic subclasses such as subclasses of ``float`` or ``tuple``)
  * This flag is mainly to simplify DType creation and casting and
    allow for performance tweaks.
  * DTypes which are not parametric must define a canonical dtype instance
    which should be a singleton.
  * Parametric dtypes require some additional methods (below).

* ``self.canonical`` method (Alternative: new instance attribute)

  * Instead of byteorder, we may want a ``canonical`` flag (reusing the
    ISNBO flag – "is native byte order" seems possible here).
    This flag signals that the data are stored in the default/canonical way.
    In practice this is always an NBO check, but generalization should be possible.
    A potential use-case is a complex-conjugated instance of Complex which
    stores ``real - imag`` instead of ``real + imag`` and is thus not
    the canonical storage.

> * ``ensure_canonical(self) -> dtype`` return a new dtype (or ``self``).

Author: Ah, I called it ensure, because we currently have an `EnsureNBO` function or so. I did not update it yet, but definitely an option.

This includes an interesting distinction:

1. Universal functions use the DType classes for dispatching, they thus
   require the common DType class (as a first step).
   While this can help with finding the correct loop to execute, the loop
   may not need the actual common dtype instance.
   (Hypothetical example:
   ``float_arr + string_arr -> string``, but the output string length is
   not the same as ``np.concatenate(float_arr, string_arr)).dtype``.)
2. Array coercion and concatenation require the common dtype *instance*.   

**Implementation:**
The implementation of the common dtype (instance) determination 
has some overlap with casting.
Casting from a specific dtype (Float64) to a String needs to find
the correct string length (a step that is mainly necessary for parametric dtypes).

We propose the following implementation:

1. ``__common_dtype__(cls, other : DTypeMeta) -> DTypeMeta`` answers what the common
   DType class is given two DType class objects.
   It may return ``NotImplemented`` to defer to ``other``.
   (For abstract DTypes, subclasses get precedence, concrete types are always
   leaves, so always get preference or are tried from left to right). 

> 2. ``__common_instance__(self, other : cls) -> cls`` is used when two instances

Reviewer 4: What is `cls` here? Is it the type of `self` too? Perhaps

```suggestion
2. ``__common_instance__(self: SelfT, other : SelfT) -> SelfT`` is used when two instances
```

   of the same DType are given. For builtin dtypes (that are not parametric), this
   currently always returns ``self`` (but ensures native byte order).
   This is to preserve metadata. We can thus provide a default implementation
   for non-parametric user dtypes.

These two cases do *not* cover the case where two different dtype instances
need to be promoted. For example `">float64"` and `"S8"`.
The solution is partially "outsourced" to the casting machinery by
splitting the operation up into three steps:

1. ``__common_dtype__(type(>float64), type(S8))`` returns `String`.
2. The casting machinery provides the information that `">float64"` casts
   to `"S32"` (see below for how casting will be defined).

> 3. ``__common_instance__("S8", "S32")`` returns the final `"S32"`. 

Reviewer 4: can you specify what objects these methods are called upon?

these are not dtypes but the corresponding scalar classes
(see also NEP 40 and 41 on a discussion why these are largely unrelated to the proposed changes).

Hierarchy of DataTypes and Abstract DTypes
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

**Motivation:**
The creation of a DType classes has already been decided in NEP 41.
This proposes the notion of _abstract_ DTypes.
There are multiple reasons for this:
1. It allows the definition of a class hierarchy, allowing in principle to write
   ``isinstance(np.dtype("float64"), np.Inexact)``.
   **DEPENDING ON WHAT WE DECIDE FOR UFUNCS, THAT MAY BE IMPORTANT THERE**
2. Allowing to write such an abstract datatype can enable code such as
   ``arr.astype(np.Complex)`` as a way to spell the desire to cast to a
   complex data type.
3. It anticipates the creation of families of DTypes by users.
   For example allowing the creation of a ``Unit`` with a concrete
   ``Float64Unit``.

**Description:**
The figure below shows the proposed datatype hierarchy.
It should be noted that abstract DTypes are distinct mainly in two ways:

1. They do not have instances. Instantiating an abstract DType has to return

>    a concrete subclass.

Author: Yes, you should not be able to. This should be a classmethod such as: `AbstractDType.default_descr()`, which can return an actual dtype. The idea being that `AbstractPyIntegerDType[54].default_descr()` return an int64.

2. Unlike concrete DTypes, abstract DTypes can be superclasses, they may also
   serve like pythons abstract base classes (ABC).

These two rules are identical to the type choices made for example in the Julia
language.
It allows for the creation of a datatype hierarchy, but avoids issues with
subclassing concrete DTypes directly:
Logic such as ``can_cast`` does not cleanly inherit e.g. from a

> ``Int64`` to a ``Datetime64`` even though the ``Datetime64`` could be seen

Author: Yes, each datetime64 with different unit is its own instance. It is a good example to use throughout, since units are one of the most complex use-cases. I think *unsafe* casting is OK for these (i.e. it is allowed to lose the unit).

> ``Int64`` to a ``Datetime64`` even though the ``Datetime64`` could be seen

Reviewer 3: Great to use it!

Though personally I do not think it should be OK to cast unsafely - you have not just thrown away precision or so, but the actual meaning of the number - just like you would if you cast from meters to seconds - I think this is something you should use  `.view(integer)` for. (In astropy, for any number with units we allow only 0, infinity, and nan to have arbitrary unit - which does break down for 0 for Celsius, but then, that is a bad unit!)

> ``Int64`` to a ``Datetime64`` even though the ``Datetime64`` could be seen

Author: That is a fair point, maybe we actually need an "even more unsafe" casting :). Note that precision loss in some sense covered by `"same_kind"` casting? I had not thought about it too much that our current "unsafe" casting. However, I think you could also do this:

* `UnitFloat64[m] -> Float64` (cannot cast!)
* `UnitFloat64[unitless] -> Float64` unsafe cast.

Now the question is, how do you get from `UnitFloat64[m]` to `UnitFloat64[unitless]`. We could even decide that you need a UFunc to do that. Or that step is "unsafe" (and a view), and you simply need two steps to get to the actual `float64`. Requiring two steps seems completely fine to me, but it seems like we may still need another level of safeness, basically what you call `view` which currently means: ignore casting safety entirely.

> ``Int64`` to a ``Datetime64`` even though the ``Datetime64`` could be seen

Reviewer 3: Your itemized example is how astropy works! But you are right that of course our quantities do have a `.value` property that just gives the unit-less version (it is just a view), and one uses this quite a bit (as one does the `to_value(new-unit)` which gives the value in the new unit). So, it may have to be that the dtype itself introduces a new casting rule? Maybe those casting strings can become dtype-specific? For now, probably best to leave open!!

> ``Int64`` to a ``Datetime64`` even though the ``Datetime64`` could be seen

Author: Yes, we could specify (for new slots) that they have to allow for new casting rules to be added in the future. But I actually think that if you are concerned that "unsafe" is not enough, the custom ufunc is not unreasonable: If you make unit, add `units.force_unit(arr, dtype=units.Float64("m"))` ufunc.

Note that while the slots are defined as special python methods here, this is
for convenience to the reader and *not* meant to imply the identical exposure
as a Python API.
This should be proposed as a separate NEP.

Additional Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the below more detailed methods, the following general
information is currently provided and will be defined on the class:

* ``flexible``:
  * Many dtypes are not flexible, i.e. they have a canonical
    representation and casting from/to it is always safe.
  * DTypes which are not flexible, must provide a canonical dtype instance
    which should be a singleton.
  * Flexible dtypes must define some additional methods.

* ``is_native(self) -> Boolean`` method, and a corresponding attribute on the
  dtype instance.
  * Instead of byteorder, we may want an ``is_native`` flag (we could just
    reuse the ISNBO flag – "is native byte order"),
    this flag signals that the data is stored in the default/canonical way.
    In practice this is always an NBO check, but generalization should be possible.
    A use case is a complex-conjugated instance of Complex which is a

>     non-canonical representation, but may be native byte order.

Author: Nice idea. Canonincal may be a nicer name. I see it as a replacement/generalization `isnative`

* ``ensure_native(self) -> dtype`` return a new dtype, or new reference to ``self``,
  the returned dtype must fullfill ``dtype.is_native() is True`` and be otherwise
  identical.

> * ``DType.type`` is the associated scalar type, also ``dtype.type`` is defined

Author: There is a pretty big philosophical and complicated issue around this, which on the one hand I would love to decide and discuss on the mailing list, but on the other hand feel it will be super hard to figure out.

Should scalars be encouraged/discouraged, and do we want array-scalars? For NumPy itself this does not matter, we will not change it. But in principle `dtype.type` could be `None` and in that case we would never return scalars (there would be no scalar after all!). On the other hand, I still somewhat like scalars, so the alternative is that I automatically create a simple scalar type for you if you set type to `None`...

The next thing is: For such new datatypes, we could try to make the ufunc `PyArray_Result` behaviour sane... I would love to just not decide it, but as soon as people create new datatypes there will be an implicit decision.

  in the same way and must be identical.

Additionally, existing methods (and C-side fields) will be provided, although
fields such as the "kind" and and "char" may be set to invalid values on
the C-side, and access may error on the Python side.
(This may be adapted later if it turns out to be an issue for newly implemented
user dtypes).

Another example of methods that should be moved to the DType class are the
various sorting functions, which shall be implemented by defining a slot:

* ``__dtype_get_sort_function__(self, sortkind="stable") -> sortfunction``

Which returns must return ``NotImplemented`` if the given ``sortkind`` is not
known.
Similarly, any function implemented previously which cannot be removed will
be implemented as a special method.
Since these methods can be deprecated and new (renamed) replacements added,
the API is not fixed and it is acceptable if it changes.

Coercion to and from Python Objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Coercing to and from python scalars requires two functions:

Author: Hmmm, the fact that we currently have a bit of a fuzzy concept, seemed that this is maybe improtant enough to have specifically. OTOH, you are right, it is largely a special casting rule (i.e. we could also have these "slots" for convenience, but actually use them to create the `CastingImpl` we actually use).

> Coercing to and from python scalars requires two functions:

Author: I am tending to: lets not worry about it (although if we change our mind on the way, fine). If we assume that most datatypes can keep up with small changes, it is not set in stone in any case.

> 1. ``__dtype_setitem__(self, item_pointer, value)``

Author: It doesn't work on the python side :), at least not for now... I guess it would have to be something like a file-like object as you say..

> 1. ``__dtype_setitem__(self, item_pointer, value)``

Reviewer 3: In principle, I guess it could default to `<relevant-piece of memory>.view('u1')` or, equivalently, `array[index].view('u1')`

> 1. ``__dtype_setitem__(self, item_pointer, value)``

Author: Yes, note that I see this not as an actual Python API proposal, but only as a way to reason about it a bit easier then writing the C version.

2. ``__dtype_getitem__(self, item_pionter, base_obj) -> object``
   The ``base_obj`` should be ignored normally, it is provided *only* for
   memory management purposes, pointing to an object owning the data.
   It exists only to allow support of structured datatypes with subarrays

>    within NumPy, which (currently) return views into the array.

Author: Yeah, at least normally it should probably. There is some complexity about how we want user scalars to behave (should they have to be array scalars at all, should we allow them to choose to not use `PyArray_Return`, and if, would reductions return a scalar or not...)
I currently see it: For now they probably should be array scalars (but it likely will be the users responsibility). But we could add at some point that dtypes can indicate that they do not want `PyArray_Return` to be called...

Some of these difficulties arise due to the fact that finding the correct shape
of the output array and finding the correct datatype are closely related.

**Implementation:**
There are two distinct cases given above: First, when the user has provided no
dtype information, and second when the user provided a DType class – 
a notion that is currently represented e.g. by ``"S"``, but not cleanly supported.

In the first case, it is necessary to establish a mapping from the python type
that was put in to the DType class.
Further, the correct dtype instance needs to be found.
This shall be implemented by the use of two informations:

1. ``type``: The current type attribute to indicate which python type is
   associated with the DType class (this is a *class* attribute that always
   exist for any datatype and is not limited to array coercion).
2. A flag allowing to to optionally not allow automatic discovery of the DType.
   This allows e.g. the addition of a ``tuple`` dtype without changing the
   parsing logic.   
3. ``__discover_descr_from_pyobject__(cls, obj) -> dtype``: A classmethod that
   returns the correct descriptor given the input object.

>    *Note that only flexible DTypes have to implement this*.

Author: Yes, there would be a default which just does `type.__new__()`, or maybe a specific `type.__default_descriptor__()`.

The ``type`` which is already associated with any dtype through the ``dtype.type``
attribute is associated to each class.
This will be cached globally to create a mapping (dictionary)
``knwon_python_types[type] = DType``.
NumPy currently uses a small hard-coded a mapping and conversion of numpy scalars
(inheriting from ``np.generic``) to achieve this, however, this forces a certain

> structure on the associated ``type``.

Author: Right, Python integers would probably map to -> `AbstractPyInt[value]` (a class), this can then return an actual dtype when asked for it (i.e. integer). At the same time, `common_dtype` can be defined correctly for it *and* whatever machinery we use for UFuncs has the information available needed for value based casting. Partially, I thought I can defer it to the UFuncs, but for array coercion it is also important.

it will not be exposed to user datatypes.
This means that if e.g. an array with a flexible string dtype is coerced above
(or cast) to an array of a fixed length string dtype (with unknown length),
this will result in an error.
Such a conversion will require passing the correct DType (fixed length of the
string) or providing a utility function to the user.

The use of a global type map means that an error or warning has to be given
if two DTypes wish to map to the same python type, in most cases DTypes user
DTypes should only be implemented for types defined within the same library to
avoid the potential for conflicts and .
It is the DType implementors responsibility to be careful about this and use
the flag to disable registration when in doubt.

**Alternatives:**

Instead of a flag disabling the registration, it would be possible to define
that only scalars of ``np.generic`` subclasses or with a ``dtype`` attribute
may automatically map to a NumPy dtype, and all other dtypes must be passes
explicitly by the user.
This removes the need to trust downstream packages to take care not to have
the potential for modifying existing code.

> **TODO: Maybe I actually like that more right now? Removes some convenience in (rare?) cases, but also removes the annoying global state...**

Author: Woops, forgot to encorporate that one already :). There is another interesting thing, which is that the actual cast (when you get the cast function) is just a view (basically `PyArray_EquivalentTypes`. I think this is better handled, by signalling that a view is OK when we get the actual casting function. Have to think about how to signal that however.

An initial alternative suggestion was to use a two-pass approach instead.
The first pass would only find the correct DType class, and the second pass
would then find correct dtype instance (the second pass is often not necessary).
The advantage of this is that the DType class information is vital for universal
functions to decide which loop to execute.
The first pass would provide the full information necessary for value based
casting currently implemented for scalars, giving even the possibility of
expanding it to e.g. list inputs ``np.add(np.array([8], dtype="uint8"), [4])``
giving a ``uint8`` result.

> This is mainly related to the question to how the common dtype is found above.

Author: Right, class hierarchy (or at least having the classes to begin with) is the first step. I would like to push that forward already before settling on this, by agreeing on NEP 41. May have to move some of the information there though...

   (Hypothetical example:
   ``float_arr + string_arr -> string``, but the output string length is
   not the same as ``np.concatenate(float_arr, string_arr)).dtype``.)
2. Array coercion, and concatenate require the common dtype *instance*.   

**Implementation:**
The implementation of the common dtype (instance) has some overlap with
casting.
Casting from a specific dtype (Float64) to a String needs to find
the correct string length (a step that is mainly necessary for flexible dtypes).

We propose the following implementation:

1. ``__common_dtype__(cls, other : DTypeMeta) -> DTypeMeta`` answers what the common
   DType class is. It may return ``NotImplemented`` to defer to ``other``.
   (For abstract DTypes, subclasses get precedence, concrete types are always
   leaves, so always get preference or are tried from left to right). 
2. ``__common_instance__(self, other : cls) -> cls`` is used when two instances
   of the same DType are given. For builtin dtypes (that are not flexible), this
   currently always returns ``self`` (but ensures native byte order).
   This is to preserve metadata. We can thus provide a default implementation

>    for non-flexible user dtypes.

Author: `__len__` is only generally defined for a DType instance! Abstract dtypes cannot be instantiated. Of course a `Float128` could inform you that all instances are 128bit, but there is no reason it has to.

I am not sure about `dtype1 & dtype2`. It might make sense to note such possibilities at some point though, if only to discourage downstream to implement dtypes which use such API for something else.

>    for non-flexible user dtypes.

Author: Did not change anything here.
About the `__call__` I think it would be OK for an abstract DType to actually return a concrete DType instance which it considers a subclass of itself (i.e. similar to a class factory). Creating the scalar should rather be through `DType.type()` or another classmethod I think.

The reuse of existing slots is interesting... We could just do that, or at least document that we may want to do that at some point ("please do not fill them in", we could even enforce that most operators are not defined by users, e.g. we have authority over what `==` does).

The last part should maybe be added, even if it is a detail?

>    for non-flexible user dtypes.

Reviewer 3: Interesting ideas - I think it would be good to add that we are still considering to what extent existing slots can be useful.

this has to be implemented by the overriding implementation.

**Alternatives:**

The use of casting for common dtype (instance) neatly separates the concerns
and allows for a minimal set of duplicate functionality being implemented.
In cases of mixed DType (classes), it also adds an additional indirection
into finding the common dtype.
The common dtype (of two instances) could thus be implemented explicitly to avoid
this indirection, potentially only as a fast-path.
The above suggestion assumes that this is, however, not a speed relevant path,
since in most cases, e.g. in array coercion, only a single python type (and thus
dtype) is involved.
The proposed design hinges in the implementation of casting to be
separated into its own ufunc-like object as described below.

In principle common DType could be defined only based on "safe casting" rules,
if we order all DTypes and find the first one both can cast to safely.
However, the issue with this approach is that a newly added DType can change
the behaviour of an existing program. For example, a new ``int24`` would be
the first valid common type for ``int16`` and ``uint16``, demoting the currently

> defined behaviour of ``int32``.

Author: My current sense is: Lets not go there :). These type of things run into scoping issues quickly. So if a user wants `uint16 + int16` to be `int24` they probably should be either using their own `uint16`, or use `dtype=int24`.
I am also OK with adding it at some point, but I am scared of it, and I would prefer if we can agree to *not* do anything in this direction right now.

> defined behaviour of ``int32``.

Reviewer 3: OK, makes sense not to start with this!

to dynamically return ``CastingImpl``.
The advantage of this addition is that it removes the requirement to know all
possible casts at DType creation time (of one of the involved DTypes).
Such API could be added at a later time. It should be noted, however,
that it would be mainly useful for inheritance like logic, which can be
problematic. As an example two different ``Float64WithUnit`` implementations
both could infer that they can unsafely cast between one another when in fact
some conbinations should cast safely or preserve the Unit (both of which the
"base" ``Float64`` would discard).
In the proposed implementation this is not possible, since the two implementations
are not aware of each other.

**Notes:**

The proposed ``CastingImpl`` this designed to be compatible with the
``UFuncImpl`` proposed in NEP YY.
While initially it will be a distinct object, the aim is that ``CastingImpl``
can be a subclass of ``UFuncImpl``.
Once this happens, this will naturally allow the use of a ``CastingImpl`` to
pass around a specialized casting function directly if so wished.

In the future, we may considering adding a way to spell out that specific

> casts are known to be *not* possible.

Author: Currently, I am thinking: Make it analogous to ufuncs, *except* for the loop discovery itself. You could just have a `np.cast` ufunc as well. But I somewhat tend to casting being special enough to not do that. Plus, it ensures that (whatever you do for ufuncs) casting is a bit more contraint.

I probably have to add some more reasons for that decision though.

C-Side API
^^^^^^^^^^

.. note:: At the time of writing, this API is a general design goal.
          Due to the size of the proposed changes, details and names will be
          in flux and updated as necessary.

DType creation
""""""""""""""

As already mentioned in NEP 41, the interface to define new DataTypes in C
is modelled after the limited API in Python, the above mentioned slots,
and some additional necessary information will thus be passed within a slots
struct and identified by ``ssize_t`` integers::

    static struct PyArrayMethodDef slots[] = {
        {NPY_dt_method, method_implementation},
        ...,
        {0, NULL}
    }

    typedef struct{
      PyTypeObject *typeobj;    /* type of python scalar */
      int flexible;             /* Is the dtype flexible? */
      int abstract;             /* Is the dtype abstract? */
      int flags;                /* Currently only the "needs API" flag */
      /* NULL terminated CastingImpl; is copied and references are stolen */

>       CastingImpl *castingimpls[];

Author: You are not inheriting from anything except DType here (unless its abstract). So yes, I could make an `AbstractDType` as a subclass (or superclass) of `np.dtype`, which is used to indicate that it is abstract.
My current thinking is that I want to be able to ensure that any abstract dtype cannot be simply instantiated, and this might be easiest. But hmmmm. The `flexible` part is unnecessary, but should allow some optimizations and also sanity checks because "flexible" dtypes require more logic.

>       CastingImpl *castingimpls[];

Author: We can use ABCs, I am not sure it is valuable though (plus I am a bit scared of python changing how they define ABCs). In fact ABCs are *effectively* defined in Python right now (they are optimized using C, but they do not use an `ExtenionMetaClass` as I do (that does not make things harder maybe though).

On the other hand, I expect the actual need we have is only overriding `isinstance`, etc. so I am not sure it is valuable to use ABCs, it seems like it may add more complexity then it solves.

>       CastingImpl *castingimpls[];

Reviewer 3: Indeed, not sure it adds enough, but really it was meant as encouragement (for you, I fear...) to look what they actually do so that we do not reinvent the wheel. The other part of ABCs is, of course, to ensure that any concrete instance has all the needed methods, etc., so they would ensure that abstract dtypes cannot be instantiated.

>       CastingImpl *castingimpls[];

Author: Note to self: It could also be an option to include a version (maybe NPY_API_VERSION maybe another one) in these structs, that way we can add fields at to the end without breaking ABI (with the new fields being safe to ignore on old versions). Note sure I like it, and it would still only allow adding things at the end of the struct.

      PyType_Slot *slots;
    } PyArrayDTypeMeta_Spec;

    PyObject* PyArray_InitDTypeMetaFromSpec(
            PyArray_DTypeMeta *user_dtype, PyArrayDTypeMeta_Spec *dtype_spec);

all of this information will be copied during instantiation.

The proposed method slots are (prepended with ``NPY_dt_``), these are
detailed above and given here for summary:

* ``is_native(self) -> {0, 1}``
* ``ensure_native(self) -> dtype``
* ``default_descr(self) -> dtype`` (return must be native and should normally be a singleton)

> * ``get_sort_function(self, NPY_SORTKIND sort_kind, void **out_sortfunction) -> success {-1, 0}``.

Author: Good point :), I am not sold on this part, it was a bit more of an example of the general direction. There was actually the fact that it maybe should return `NotImplemented` if the SORTKIND is not understood.

  ``out_sortfunction`` may be ``NULL`` if the sort kind is unknown or not implemented.
* ``setitem(self, char *item_ptr, PyObject *value) -> {-1, 0}``
* ``getitem(self, char *item_ptr, PyObject (base_obj) -> object or NULL``
* ``discover_descr_from_pyobject(cls, PyObject) -> dtype or NULL``
* ``common_dtype(cls, other) -> DType, NotImplemented, or NULL``
* ``common_instance(self, other) -> dtype or NULL``

> If not set, most slots are filled with slots which either error or defer automatically.

Author: Often yes... But I think the issue is for container types (covariance vs. contravariance). It all confuses me a lot. The main thing is that it is never really *safe* to cast to the super class, but is it always *unsafe*? If I cast from Float64 to UnitFloat64 and it subclasses, should we allow that as "unsafe". Is `nonzero` still correct if I derive an NAInt64 from Int64?

Wikipedia says: Mutable data types which act as both sources and sinks should be invariant (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Covariance_and_contravariance_(computer_science)), but to be honest I have not fully grasped the theory. But whenever I tried to think about a good generalization something seemed to make it complicated...

> If not set, most slots are filled with slots which either error or defer automatically.

Author: However, I think it might be fine on AbstractDTypes, and even inheriting "defaults" from the AbstractDType, even for slots/casting! You just must not subclass *concrete* dtypes. I am just thinking we can defer that a bit for now, probably.

> If not set, most slots are filled with slots which either error or defer automatically.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, thinking more, I'm now wondering about not being allowed to subclass `float64` - and it may again be good to be super-explicit: I think from what you write as an dtype instance as something that completely describes what some pieces of memory mean - this to me makes sense (though would be good to be explicit how it goes for units like in datetime!). But what about the dtype above? Is it that the class knows what the meaning is, and the instance only defines possible details of the storage? But why would that need to prevent subclassing?

Though probably none of this matters too much - there is real clarity about what the `AbstractDType` is, which I think is the more important distinction.

> If not set, most slots are filled with slots which either error or defer automatically.

Author: I am cautious about subclassing, and still think it is a bad idea. We can make it easy to wrap or fallback to other datatypes, but...
There is actually a *real* and valid use case for subclassing which for sure does not violate Liskov's substitution principle: In theory (not sure how realistic) CuPy, could subclass float64, to add information that they need to work on the GPU, but still share implementation (and even be compatible with) NumPy.
(adding a sentence for that, may get a bit much, but it is an important possibility I think)

Non-flexible dtypes do not have to implement:

* ``discover_descr_from_pyobject`` (uses ``default_descr`` instead)
* ``common_instance`` (uses ``default_descr`` instead)

> * ``ensure_native`` (uses ``default_descr`` instead)

Author: Ahh! Yes, we could do that. Hmmmmm.

> * ``ensure_native`` (uses ``default_descr`` instead)

Author: On the one hand i agree (from the Python API its a nice choice for sure), on the other hand, it does seem a bit clumsy from C maybe? Note that in the end I think I want to store the flag in either case, since, if it is valuable at all, lookup has to be *very* quick in C, and subclass checking is slower (very slow for abstract classes, although I could hand optimize that).

Which will be correct for most dtypes *which do not store metadata*.

Other slots may be replaced by convenience versions, e.g. sorting methods
can be defined by providing:

* ``compare(self, char *item_ptr1, char *item_ptr2, int *res) -> {-1, 0}``
  *TODO: We would like an error return, is this reasonable? (similar to old
  python compare)*

which uses generic sorting functionality.

CastingImpl
"""""""""""

The external API for ``CastingImpl`` will be limited initially to defining:

* ``cast_kind`` attribute, which can be one of the supported casting kinds.
  This is the safest cast possible. For example casting between two NumPy
  strings is of course "safe" in general, but may be "same kind" in a specific
  instance if the second string is shorter. If neither type is flexible this
  ``adjust_descriptors`` must use it. 

> * ``adjust_descriptors(dtypes_in[2], dtypes_out[2], casting) -> int {0, -1}``

Author: Note to self: After talking to Warren, I it may makes sense if we return `casting`, that way we could in theory add new casting more easily. It also pushes the natural place to the construct the casting error out of the `adjust_descriptors` function, where there is more context to construct an error message relevant to the user.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I like that idea.

* ``strided_loop(char **args, npy_intp *dimensions, npy_intp *strides, dtypes[2]) -> int {0, nonzero}`` (must currently succeed)

This is identical to the proposed API for ufuncs. By default the two dtypes
are passed in as the last argument. On error return (if no error is set) a
generic error will be given. Note that right now users can only provide a contiguous

> loop.

Author: Yes, my guess would be we allow spec to get things like:
* contiguous_inner_loop
* strided_inner_loop
* scalar_inner_loop

and pick the best one for each case. We could allow users to override the whole thing as well, like a `get_inner_loop` function with a lot additional info.

The iterator API currently does not currently support casting errors, this is
a bug that needs to be fixed. While it is not fixed the loop should always
succeed (return 0).

Although verbose, the API shall mimic the one for creating a new DType.
The ``PyArrayCastingImpl_Spec`` will include a field for ``dtypes`` and largely

> identical to a ``PyArrayUFuncImpl_Spec``::

Author: The ufunc loop will have the same `adjust_dtypes` function. And the UfuncLoop/Impl object may in the future be callable (on ndarray) from python. Which CastingImpl could inherit from it. Further the way the actual inner-loop is fetched, can be identical.

> identical to a ``PyArrayUFuncImpl_Spec``::

Author: Hmm, good point, the `casting` is somewhat more central (we need a default one, ufuncs do not need that I think), but really I probably still need a `FromSpec` function, so small differences between the two can be moved there to keep it more similar.
